Ladies and gentlemen,
please welcome the Director of
Graphics and Imaging for Mac OS X,
Peter Graffagnino.
Hi, everybody.
Welcome to WWDC.
My name is Peter Graffagnino.
I'm the Director of Graphics
and Imaging at Apple Computer,
and I'll be talking about some of
the technologies we're putting in
Mac OS X at the graphics services layer
for all of you to take advantage of.
Basically, we're going to overview
a bunch of technologies.
Some of these are new.
Some of these we're talking
about for the first time here.
Some of these should be very familiar.
And we're going to have lots of demos.
We're going to have Ralph Brunner
come up on stage and run us through
a whole bunch of demos for you.
So let me go to the architecture slide,
which you've probably seen
in every presentation so far,
which is the basic layer diagram of OS X.
At the lowest level,
we have the core operating system,
and we have core services above that,
application services layer where
most of our technology lives,
and then frameworks on top of that.
I'll be centering mostly my
talk on this area right here.
We have a lot of great technology
for you that we've built into
the graphics system in OS X.
Based on industry standards as
well as some Apple innovations,
we have 2D for PDF and PostScript.
We have 3D with OpenGL.
We have Apple innovations
such as ColorSync,
Quartz, TrueType, QuickTime.
You combine all of that with an
industrial strength operating system
underneath based on Mac and BSD and some
pretty great frameworks above Carbon,
Quartz, Java.
And you really have a great platform
for innovation for the future.
And we're pretty excited about
all the ideas we have internally.
And hopefully you guys will be
able to generate a lot of cool
ideas too about what you can do.
Let me touch on the graphics
block diagram a little.
Mac OS X is a layered system,
and even within our
graphic services layer,
we have divided into little sub-layers.
We have at the bottom what we
call Core Graphics Services,
which is the Windows server that's
the central repository of global
information for the computer,
the Windows database,
those sorts of things.
On top of that,
we have a variety of drawing frameworks
that are linked into your application.
We have the new framework,
the Core Graphics 2D rendering.
We have QuickDraw,
which you're all familiar
with from Carbon.
We have QuickTime for media handling,
and OpenGL for 3D.
So those libraries link
into your application.
The Core Graphics Services server handles
the coordination among all the apps.
So to give kind of a full list
of all the technologies that
I'll be talking about today,
with the exception of
QuickTime at the bottom there,
we have Quartz,
which is the new technology,
the Core Graphic
Services windowing system,
as well as the 2D rendering library.
We have QuickDraw,
which you're all familiar
with from Carbon.
We have ColorSync,
our color management technology.
Mac OS X printing,
I'll be talking about that.
OpenGL for 3D.
ImageCapture,
which is a new framework you
saw demoed in Bertrand's talk,
which is for 2D still image acquisition.
And QuickTime,
which there are a bunch of sessions
on elsewhere in the conference,
but I won't be covering here.
So the first thing I'm going
to talk about is the core
graphics services layer,
which is that bottom substrate that
kind of sits below all of the 2D and 3D
and media that happens on the display.
It's a client-server windowing system,
not unlike DisplayPostScript or XWindows,
if you're familiar with
any of those technologies.
And it's really responsible
for the low-level window
system programming interface.
The Carbon Window Manager and
the Cocoa Window Object are
clients of this API,
and when you make calls to
those in your applications,
it turns around and calls the
server to allocate a window,
destroy a window, or what have you.
The server is also
responsible for event routing,
making sure the event stream gets
to the correct application based on
focus and what they're interested in.
And also basic real estate management.
And that's really important.
Thank you.
in terms of getting everyone to
share the display cooperatively.
some of the key innovations
in the Core Graphics Services.
Some of this stuff we haven't
been able to talk about before
because we were waiting for the
Aqua user interface to come out,
but we've been working on this
stuff for a couple of years,
and the basic idea is
that the Windows system is
really upgrading its model.
Instead of being a per pixel switcher,
which is primarily what Mac OS or
X Windows or other windowing systems are,
we've gone for a model where there's a
per pixel mix from all the windows on the
display to create the final presentation.
What does this mean?
Well, this means that Windows can have a
bunch of attributes that get applied
to them on the pixels in your window,
can have attributes applied
on their way to the display.
For example,
if you're going to have a window
that's a little bit smaller
than the size of the window,
you can have a window that's a little
bit smaller than the size of the window.
So for example,
if you're going to have a window
that's a little bit smaller
than the size of the window,
you can have a window that's a little
bit smaller than the size of the window.
So for example,
if you're going to have a window
that's a little bit smaller than
the size of the For example,
Windows have a full per-pixel
alpha channel for transparency.
There's also layer opacity,
so there's an overall
fade value on each window.
There's a transform, an affine transform,
a mesh warp, and color space conversion
for YUV and depth conversion.
So a lot of these attributes
apply at mix time to the
graphics to create the display,
regardless of what drawing
framework you're using.
The client-server mechanism is in
place for window system control,
creation and deletion, moving,
resizing of windows.
Drawing, however,
happens through a shared memory mechanism
using anonymous memory objects in
Mach to share a read-write memory
between the client and the server.
QuickDraw is just drawing
into standard memory,
same as core graphics,
and the server is able to see that
memory and apply the mix to the display.
Since the server is a mixing server,
it needs to repair part of the display.
It may need pixels from your
application and pixels from
someone else's application to
actually make up the display.
So the important thing to remember is
that the drawing happens in the client,
so it's fast, just procedure call,
hitting the memory of the back buffer,
and the mixing is in the server where
the complete display is constructed.
So I'm going to bring up Ralph now.
There he is.
Ralph Brunner,
member of the graphics team.
We're going to do a little
demo for you of just the basic
windowing facilities on OS X.
We could have the demo machine.
Okay, you can see the display.
The UI folks have been able to do a very
clean window outline because we've given
them the ability to do the shadowing.
So you can see if you
bring up the zoom tool,
you know, it's kind of a subtle effect.
They didn't go overboard.
But that's all live
content underneath there.
If the finder were drawing,
you would be seeing those pixels
updating underneath the shadow.
And so that really gives the user
interface a nice subtle effect and
allows the application to use as
much of the real estate as possible.
So that's kind of the first thing that
the windowing system has given us.
You can also see the inactive title
bars are partially translucent.
The menus,
we use the fading and the opacity.
So you can see the window fade out.
You can see if the window
is hanging up there.
You can move around behind it.
It fades out.
If you bring up an application document,
we'll show you some of
the warping features.
So here's a tech sample document.
If you go to save that document if it's
dirty or close it and when it's dirty,
you get a little animation.
You can see that alert
is translucent as well.
Now the application has just
drawn its alert to that.
It doesn't necessarily know
that that window is translucent.
That's happening in the mix when
it's presented to the display,
as is the animation.
If the window's too small,
we have this sheet effect and
that's done by an animation of a
mesh warp on the bits as they're
getting flushed to the screen.
So that's how we do that and
the windows can move together,
things like that.
So if you make the window
a little more rectangular,
you can see that the window is
now a little bit more transparent.
So if you make the window
a little more rectangular,
you can see that the window is
now a little bit more transparent.
Angular, then we can minify it,
which brings in the Gini,
which is another application
of the Mesh Warp.
We create a nicely sync-filtered snapshot
of the actual content of the graphics,
and then we run it through the
mesh motion path down to the dock.
In the dock, all of the dock content is
little windows including the
back translucent part there,
and that's showing off the scaling
as well as the per pixel alpha
so you can see through the icon.
So I think that's about it
for the basic window demo.
OK, we can go back to the slides.
So now I'm going to cover some
of the drawing components that
you can use in your applications
to draw in 2D or 3D or whatever.
First and foremost is QuickDraw,
which is the key 2D component of Carbon,
which you're all familiar with.
It's the same API,
and it's the same code base, in fact,
with just a few minor changes
at the bottom end to talk to
the new windowing system that we
support on Mac OS 9 and Mac OS X.
There are a few key differences
that you need to be aware of.
You don't need to be
aware of all of them,
but you might want to in certain cases.
One is there's automatic
buffering support.
So when you talk to a Windows graph port,
you're not really talking to the display.
You're talking to the shared memory area
where your graphics is being blitted to,
and then those graphics are
being flushed to the display,
either at wait next
event time or end update,
or you can call it explicitly
if you want those graphics
to be flushed to the display.
So that's one thing to be aware of if
you do a lot of drawing and it's not
showing up because you haven't hit
end update or gotten another event.
You might want to sprinkle a
few flushing calls in there.
The other thing we're not allowing is
direct access to the screen's graph port.
There is a full-screen
API if you want to do a game,
so we have that covered.
But when the graphical
user interface is running,
you can see there's a lot
of dynamicism going on,
and we can't allow applications
to draw directly to the screen.
We have certain optimizations
in there for people like
QuickTime and things like that,
so there are some corner cases to that.
But the window has to be on top, opaque,
not mesh-transformed and all that stuff
to actually allow that case to happen.
By and large,
it's best just to stay away from that
and let us handle the window composite.
All the quickdraw drawing is opaque since
the window has a per pixel alpha channel.
We had to make a decision
about what kind of pixels,
what kind of alpha quickdraw
drew and it's basically 1.0.
So all quickdraw content
in the window is opaque.
The window can still have an overall
fade value on it so you can get
translucency with a quickdraw window,
but it can't actually draw
a partially opaque pixel.
You need to be aware of this in
certain cases in 32-bit mode where
we do store the alpha inline.
In 16-bit mode we have a separate
plane which quickdraw doesn't see.
But in 32-bit mode we actually do
use the high byte of the color for
the alpha and that needs to be set to
FF if you're doing your own blitting.
If it's not, you might see holes in
your windows occasionally,
which is kind of fun, but not intended.
The other thing to be aware
of is in the printing case,
the quickdraw bottlenecks are
implemented rather than by
drivers by system software.
I'll get to how they're
implemented in a second,
but it's a common set of quickdraw
bottlenecks regardless of what driver you
may be talking to in the printing case.
The other 2D rendering library we have,
this is the new 2D rendering library
we've talked about for a few WWDCs now.
It's called Core Graphics 2D Rendering,
part of the Core Graphics Framework.
It's the key 2D graphics engine
beneath Cocoa and also beneath Java,
or Java 2D implementation is
implemented on top of Core Graphics.
It's a PDF PostScript imaging model,
very industry standard.
We interpret PDF files.
We're based on the PDF 1.2 spec
with some 1.3 features now.
The major feature we're
missing is the shaded fill.
We're working on that
and we'll get that soon.
And we'll continue to track the
specs as closely as possible and work
with Adobe on future enhancements.
It's fully anti-alias,
very fast scan converter.
Scan converts on the fly.
Anti-alias is text at
subpixel position on the fly.
And it's vector-based for
resolution independence,
which has always been true
of PostScript and PDF,
but this vector-based
buzzword is out there now,
so we have to remember to apply
it to older technology too.
The Core Graphics 2D architecture, again,
is sort of layered and factored out.
It's basically a hub
architecture where we have the
Core Graphics API at the core.
Above that, we have the ability to parse
PDF files and call the API to draw it.
We have a C API that you can
call from your applications.
QuickDraw, with the QuickDraw printing
bottlenecks in the printing case,
are implemented by calling down
to the Core Graphics layer.
And Java 2D, as well,
is implemented by calling the
Core Graphics rendering library.
Underneath the different context
implementations we currently have,
obviously,
we have an on-screen rendering context.
We have a PDF file creation context.
We have a PostScript file
creation context and a raster
data context for printing.
In the printing case,
what happens is if you're printing from
a Carbon app going through QuickDraw,
your graphics come in through QuickDraw,
get recorded in the first pass when
we generate the spool file through
the core graphics rendering library
and out that PDF arrow there,
sent to the back end
of the printing system.
The back end of the printing system,
it comes back in the top through a PDF.
Depending upon what kind
of printer it ended up at,
you get either PostScript or raster
data or I'm sure third parties will
do their own PDF renderers as well
to plug into that architecture.
But standardizing on PDF as that
back end of the printing system,
I think, will be a big advantage for us.
So the Core Graphics 2D rendering
library really leverages and is leveraged
by a bunch of Apple technologies.
I talked about Cocoa and Java 2D.
But also internally,
we rely on other pieces
of Apple technology,
tried and true technologies
like Color Sync,
Apple Type Services.
These are mature technologies,
been at Apple for a while,
and we're able to just leverage those
to do our PDF Core Graphics rendering.
So that's really great.
On the other side,
in addition to Cocoa and Java 2D,
Appearance Manager is using
Core Graphics to draw all the text.
If you'll notice,
it's anti-alias and has a slight blur,
drop shadow effect added to it.
And so that's going through the
Core Graphics API so you can draw
Appearance Manager text and it's
actually calling Core Graphics.
QuickTime,
we've worked with the QuickTime team
on a PDF graphics importer.
This allows PDF to be handled
by QuickTime Graphics.
So we've got a lot of graphics
importer architecture.
So if you're using
QuickTime Graphics importer,
you'll get a PDF if you hook it
up to do drag and drop or import
or whatever in your application.
In fact, we have a demo of that.
We can go back to the demo machine.
We're going to show you,
this is a version of
Apple Works that's in development.
It's an update that will
hopefully be coming out soon,
running under OS X here.
This is actually a
CFM application in all its glory.
And what we're going to do
is Ralph created a little
word processing document,
typed in some text, and now he's got a
directory full of PDFs.
He's going to drag it over.
Apple Works guys have hooked up the
graphics import capability to ask
QuickTime if it can handle the file,
so you can do the same
thing with TIFF or whatever.
But now with, on OS X,
with our PDF support,
you just get that for free.
So that's pretty cool.
I think that's, you know, a great,
if you're not using graphics importers
now and you have an application
like this that can embed graphics,
definitely start looking at that.
So you see on resize,
the codec gets called
to re-render the data.
It's fully vectors and re-antialiased.
and everything.
So that's pretty cool.
So back to the slides.
So if you want to dig a little deeper
and not just do the core graphics or
the graphics importer with QuickTime,
but you actually want to call the API,
there's going to be a detailed session
on Friday about the 2D drawing API.
Derek Clegg is going to give a
pretty detailed overview of it.
I'll just give you a few bullets here.
It's a C-based API, very straightforward,
virtually one-to-one with
PDF PostScript imaging model.
The naming convention we use for the
functions is similar to core foundation
if you were at any of those talks.
So for example, to draw the current path,
to fill the current path,
the BCG context draw path,
you pass it the context,
and then an enumeration that
says you want it filled.
You can also say stroke
or stroke and fill.
Very straightforward.
There's abstractions for transformations,
color spaces, images, paths,
kind of all the objects you would expect
in the PDF and PostScript imaging model.
So to give you a demo,
a short demo of that,
you're also going to see
this at Derek's session.
But if we can get back
to the demo machine.
We have a little application
here we call Carbon Draw.
One of our engineers, Mike Marinkovitch,
had this as a little quick draw example.
And it's basically a little
drawing canvas that you can
create simple line art in just
how to build a basic application.
What Mike did was he had already
kind of factored out his code and he
had one module which basically did
all of the content rendering there.
And he replaced that with a module
on OS X that calls Core Graphics.
And so he also prettied up the
user interface a little bit to
bring out some of the features
of OS X and Core Graphics.
Well,
here's the Carbon Color Picker which
is looking pretty good these days.
The crayons are my favorite.
and I got that Aqua look going.
We have the full PostScript line
style implementation as you'd expect,
so you can change the end caps,
round end caps.
You can see if you create an ellipse,
we can show you that.
And Mike actually didn't
get totally done converting.
You can see when he rubber bands,
it's actually QuickDraw doing
the rubber banding and then uses
Core Graphics to draw the content.
So he's kind of halfway
through converting it.
But it's a nice thing to show that you
can kind of live in both worlds there.
So we have the dash implementation.
We've got one particular dash setting.
You can change the joins
and the dashes and,
you know, so kind of fun.
So we're going to make
this available sometime.
Thanks.
Sometime after WWC,
the one thing the app doesn't do yet,
which we want to show how to do,
is print that out to show how to
get from the QuickDraw graph port
to the core graphics context when
you're printing so you can replay the
same objects in the printing path.
So that's it for that.
If you want to see more of that,
I think they're going to show
actual code snippets of that as
well at the session on Friday.
So printing.
Printing for OS X is a
completely new architecture.
It's a client-server architecture with
a clean separation between the front end
of the printing process and the back end.
And they communicate via the PDF spool
file and a job ticket mechanism,
which is an XML file that
basically describes the
finishing options on the file,
whether it's supposed to be NUP or
a certain paper tray or a certain
color correction strategy or whatever.
It simplifies the driver model a lot.
For those of you who have
written printer drivers on OS 9,
you know, from the QuickDraw bottlenecks
to the paper and the printer
is basically your deal.
If you want to do spooling,
background printing, queue management,
whatever, you know,
you've got to write a ton
of code to get that done.
We're taking care of all of that in OS X,
and if you're bringing up a new printer,
you really just have to write
the engine control logic.
In fact, most of the I/O code we have
for USB you can probably reuse
and other I/O techniques.
And, you know,
a little bit of UI to bring out
your printer-specific features,
but that's really about it.
Again,
PDF is the default school file format.
That brings us a lot of
advantages in the sense that we
can do print preview for free.
You can also debug your printing code
pretty quickly by just looking at the
PDF output rather than wasting paper.
It also leverages Core Graphics,
the 2D rendering library as a RIP,
which we spend a lot of time optimizing.
The printer developers can take
advantage of that out of the box and
get pretty high-performance rendering.
So demos of printing
are never very exciting,
so we're going to demo print preview.
I shouldn't say that totally, but...
We don't have a printer on stage,
but this again is Apple Works.
So Ralph created a little spreadsheet
here for his wild creature collection.
We're going to exercise the
PDF graphic importer a little bit
and drag in a couple of files.
So this is the raptor.
We resize it down.
This is the ferocious chicken.
So it's getting the vector resizing.
Now, a spreadsheet is typically something
that's difficult to share unless the
other person has the application.
You don't always want to
send them the original file.
So exchanging a PDF is kind
of a good way to do that.
So one way you can do that
on OS X is to bring up print
and hit the preview button.
So all the QuickDraw calls are
going to get translated to PDF,
and we're going to open
up our little PDF viewer.
And we still have a couple
of bugs with the black there,
but ignore that for now.
So you see basically we've got a nice
PDF file in preview out of QuickDraw,
and that's just built in.
Thanks.
There's more.
If you bring up mail then,
you want to mail that to someone,
CC someone else.
If you have any questions
about something,
you can actually just drag out
of that title bar proxy there and
that will image right in line.
You can send that if
someone's not running OS X,
that'll just show up as a PDF attachment.
It'll launch in Acrobat and
look just like that in print.
So as I said before, you know,
not just for users but for developers,
when you're debugging your printing code,
you're trying to figure out how to lay
out your graphics so you don't have,
like,
hanging words off one page to the next.
You can iterate in that preview
loop to get your pages to
lay out correctly before,
you know, you have to get it all
the way to the printer.
So that's a good way to debug
printing code for developers too.
Okay, back to the slides.
Image Capture.
Image Capture is a new framework that
we'll be talking about at WWDC tomorrow.
It's an API and some system
services for digital still cameras.
We're focusing primarily on cameras.
Right now, the architecture is flexible
enough to handle scanners
and other devices as well.
We're going to be building in
support for the new USB still
camera protocol called PTP,
which is coming out soon.
I'm told the cameras this summer will,
by and large,
be shipping with that protocol.
There's a bunch of
cameras out there already.
We have drivers for some,
and we'll get drivers for more
by working with the vendors.
But writing a driver for
this architecture is actually
very straightforward.
The API will be available on
both Mac OS 9 and Mac OS X.
And we're also providing a simple user
experience for downloading the photos.
So when the hot plug event
comes into the computer,
there'll be a control panel that'll
come up and allow the users to say
what they want to do with their image,
most likely just download
them or whatever.
We'll be showing that.
I think there are going to be some
good demos tomorrow at this session,
too.
So if you're interested in that stuff,
please attend.
Another piece of technology you
definitely should be aware of is OpenGL.
OpenGL is the only 3D graphics
API we support on Mac OS X.
So things like Rave and QuickDraw 3D
are not being brought forward to OS X.
Focusing all of our energy on OpenGL,
right now we're at the 1.1 spec level.
We have a bunch of extensions,
all of the interesting extensions that
the game developers have been asking for.
We'll continue to track as
more extensions come out and
more hardware comes out with
those extensions and hardware.
We will track those as
quickly as possible.
And OpenGL 1.2 is also
on the horizon as well.
It's fully accelerated on
Rage 128 based systems.
That's in DP4, in what you have.
That's all of the Macs you can
currently buy except for the iBook.
Support for earlier hardware
is in software right now,
so you can definitely
write your app on that.
The software renderer
is actually pretty good.
We are working on support
for Rage Pro and some of the
earlier accelerators as well.
We're juggling that with support
for new hardware that's coming,
which it's always easier to
get engineers to work on the
new stuff than the old stuff.
So hopefully we'll be
able to get it all done,
but just to let you know,
we're probably going to be
prioritizing new hardware before
going back to the old stuff.
Just to put that out there.
But it's not my call,
so give us feedback.
One of the things we've done in
the OpenGL implementation since
it was being brought up at the
same time as the I/O Kit and all
of that stuff happening together,
we have a pretty advanced resource
allocation hardware abstraction
layer inside the kernel.
This layer is able to quickly manage
texture paging and buffer paging on and
off the card in a very optimized format.
And we've been able to do things
like play Quake reasonably
with 2 meg of texture memory.
Launch many applications which
saturate the texture memory and you
get a very smooth slowdown as you
need to load more and more textures.
It's really just the cost of that
extra command to load the texture.
It's a very smooth degradation.
Because we think over time more and
more applications are going to be
taking advantage of this and we really
want to optimize not just for games,
but for a world where, say,
every application is using the 3D pipe.
Okay, so I have to apologize first.
This part of the demo,
you are going to see a command line,
so if that bothers you, hold your eyes.
I apologize, it's my program.
This is a little program
I wrote called Slide,
and it talks to OpenGL,
talks to QuickTime to
load a bunch of JPEGs.
These are some
JPEGs I took at the office.
I took my own advice,
used graphic importers,
it wasn't that hard.
About 600 lines of code,
and you can see what I've done is just
put the textures on little planes and
kind of moving them back and forth,
so it kind of looks like a 2D app.
So, these are all my friends at work.
But just to show you it's 3D,
I added a little mouse handling in
there so Ralph can move back on the
camera and then ease it off to the side.
Kind of awkward,
but... So you can see what's
happening is those planes are just
kind of moving along an axis in and
out of the camera with the... using
the texture blending functions.
get kind of a nice effect.
There's Ralph's modeling
tool for the water demo.
I don't know if you saw that go by.
Maybe now with Maya we can get
you some better modeling tools.
So I took my own advice
and used graphic importers.
I said, "Well, we've got this other
directory full of PDFs.
Maybe I should try to run my same program
on those PDFs." I honestly did this.
I realized after the fact, I said, "Wait,
that slide demo I'm working on,
I could use that with
PDFs." And a few days ago,
I tried it, and it actually worked.
The next demo will show a way to
use Core graphics and 3D together.
Because we think with the
Core graphics 2D rendering library,
you can do pretty nice dynamic alpha
textures if you have a game that you want
to do UI or you just want to do some nice
2D rendering to then use as a texture.
We think the combination of those
two things will be pretty useful.
So that's that.
We can go back to the
slides for just one sec.
Thanks.
The next demo is a 3D compositor.
You saw this in the keynote.
Ralph is responsible for it,
so thank him.
And he was responsible for the
compositor you saw last year,
too.
And it just added more features.
The basic idea was here.
Originally, we wrote the app as a demo of
what can you do with PDF and
compositing and anti-aliasing.
And actually, the engine that drives this
application is the same thing that's
running the whole windowing system.
When we first showed the application,
we couldn't really talk about that,
but the layer composite engine here
is actually running the whole display.
And so what we thought
would be fun is to,
you know, maybe,
I don't know if you have like a
packaging application or something.
Again, there's a way with the
PDF built into the system,
you know,
maybe there's a nice application
idea here to do some kind
of simulation like that.
And you can get pretty high performance.
You can drag around the PDF,
take advantage of the
high performance 2D.
You can resize it, rotate it,
and it's just getting texture mapped.
Ralph can also move around the lights.
Did you move those yet?
Steve didn't show all
the features on stage.
So that little thing there is
the light that's whipping around.
That can animate too.
So anyway, I mean,
this was something literally, you know,
we put together in the last week or so,
you know,
to try to show off a little bit of
OS X and all the work we've been doing.
But, you know,
you guys have a whole year until
next year to impress us with what
you can do with all this technology.
So just to kind of whet
your appetite there.
Okay, I think that's it for that.
Okay, the next thing we're going to
talk about is performance tools.
It's pretty important in this new world
where you don't always see what's going
on if your application is drawing that
you take some time to optimize because
you can find that you'll be drawing
things a lot of times in the back buffer
that aren't necessarily being shown.
You may be drawing the same
thing over and over again.
You may be flushing too much.
It's really important
to try to tune that.
We've gone through inside of Apple on
a lot of iterations with all the other
teams to try to improve performance.
Some of the tools we've
developed in-house we're
going to be making available.
They're not fully supported in DP4.
The windowing system
has the debugging hooks,
but we don't have a tool to turn them on.
It's just a question of giving
you a small app that can turn on
some of these debugging hooks.
Ralph is going to bring you through
some of the performance tools.
Hopefully,
if there are any of our colleagues
at Apple whose apps we're going
to show here and embarrass,
we apologize in advance.
We'll help you tune your code later.
Okay, back to Ralph.
Okay.
Go ahead.
What I'm going to show is this little
application called Quartz Debug.
And what it does is whenever an
application flushes the contents of
the backing store onto the screen,
it flashes that area briefly in yellow
so you see what's getting drawn.
So for example,
if you move over the dock,
which does a lot of drawing,
you see it flickers light madly.
So, how do you use that?
So, for example,
I take a demo application called Sketch,
and I draw a circle which
has reasonable performance,
but when I turn on the rulers,
I noticed that performance
is suddenly very bad.
So, with that little tool,
What this setting does,
it flashes yellow,
waits for a few milliseconds,
and then does the actual drawing so that
you can see more clearly what's going on.
So you see,
this application actually redraws quite
a bit of the rulers every mouse update,
and that's the reason why it's so slow.
And what's that rectangle
like in the upper left?
Which one?
I don't know,
the big yellow one that goes in
the upper left of the content.
I'm not sure why that needs to be drawn.
Oh, I don't know.
Obviously there's some pixel
touched in the upper left corner.
Okay.
So, the message here is whenever
you have an event loop,
try to flush exactly once per mouse move,
mouse click, or whatever the event
is you're responding to.
And that has two reasons.
One, it just looks better because the
end user just sees one single
update and everything is just there.
And the second thing is that memory
bandwidth to the backing store is
about six times higher on our current
machines than it is to the frame buffer.
So, flushing less actually
helps a lot performance.
Okay, let me quit this one.
Another application I'm
going to show is Champollion.
And I clicked on another switch up there,
which is all the flush drawing.
So now I'm not only marking
every time the application flush,
I actually mark every time
a single primitive is drawn.
So it's similar to seeing a
drawing directly on screen.
And you see it's now redrawing the
icon bar at the top of the window.
With pauses.
That's not that slow in the back.
Yeah,
there's a little delay in there that
you actually see what's going on.
Okay, and what this application does,
when I type a character,
you see it's actually redrawing
the scroll bars several times.
[Transcript missing]
Sometimes you have an application and
it does not perfectly efficient drawing,
but you still get away with it
because you have a lot of CPU power.
Well, you should try to remove those
performance bottlenecks anyway,
because when the computer
is under heavy load,
like several other
applications are running,
then this stuff can actually cause
additional paging because you execute
code which doesn't need to be executed.
So,
it is quite a... I would like to advise
people to actually use that tool and...
Basically, only draw whatever has changed
and skip everything else.
Okay.
Okay, thanks.
Well, wait a second.
Oh, wait.
We have something else.
You can also get a list from the
Windows Server which lists you all
Windows that have been allocated.
So it's probably a bit
hard to see up here,
but every line represents
a window and you see which
application has allocated it.
So, for example,
Yes, Champollion here has one window
which is about 600 by 500 pixels,
which is the main document window,
and another window which
is 1,000 by 22 pixels,
which is the menu bar.
So,
all of these windows require additional
memory because there's a backing
store there that catches the bits.
Essentially, if a window is off-screen,
it is a good idea to release it.
Otherwise,
you're just spending something like a few
hundred K of memory just for that window,
and it's usually faster to redraw
a window when you need it again
than swapping it in from disk.
So, as a typical example here,
we have a login window here,
which was launched before
the entire show here started.
And actually, the login window has its
window allocated somewhere,
it's just off-screen.
So here are something like 300K
which could have been saved.
Okay.
Great.
Some great tips there.
We'll be getting you some of those
tools like the Quartz debug as
soon as we can after DP4 here.
Actually,
that one's pretty easy because it is
really just that app and it just sets
a few bits in the Windows server.
Future directions.
As we move forward,
one of the things to notice
is there hasn't been a huge
change of story in terms of the
technologies we're working on.
In terms of 2D, 3D,
we made the OpenGL decision
over a year ago.
Media with QuickTime, obviously.
We're pretty pleased with the core set
of technologies we've picked to focus on,
and we think that those bets
are really going to pay off.
What we're doing now
is a couple of things.
We're continuing in each technology
area to obviously advance
the state of the art there.
For example,
in core graphics in the 2D rendering,
we're looking at things
like raster effects model.
If you've seen the SVG spec,
there's a pretty sophisticated
raster effects model in there.
More extensions for transparency and
blending modes and things like that.
To really upgrade the 2D graphics
to... be able to do a lot of the
capabilities on the fly to render
the whole button instead of just
the label text and things like that.
To do that, you need a lot of power,
a lot of filtering operations
and things like that.
We really see 2D going
towards that expressiveness,
almost a blend of image processing
and 2D is the direction that
core graphics is going to go in.
The other thing that we're really
working on is continuing to look
for opportunities to integrate all
this technology together better.
A prime example of that is
OpenGL and the windowing system.
We didn't show you back in the demo,
but you can actually drag a
translucent icon over the 3D
content and it all gets mixed in,
following the mixing metaphor
that we've set up for the desktop.
Of course,
what we have to do to achieve that,
you don't want to hear about,
but it actually works.
There is some loss in frame rate,
but the user experience,
it just feels like any other window.
Over time,
we want to be able to do those things
much more efficiently and hardware,
take advantage of OpenGL within
the windowing system itself,
and to fully accelerate the whole
desktop and make a great experience.
That's another key integration
area that we're looking at as well.
So the summary here,
if you're doing a Carbon application,
there's a couple of
simple things you can do.
You can definitely take a look at
these performance tools and see if
there's too much flushing going on
or flushing you don't understand.
A lot of times it's not necessarily
your code if you're using
Power Plan or something like that.
The updates may be coming from there,
so kind of chasing down
through the layers,
making sure that the buffering
is as efficient as possible.
And of course,
using QuickTime graphic importers,
if your application needs to
import any graphical images,
it's a great way to do that.
And you'll get the free feature of
the PDF graphics importer on OS X.
Also, if you're interested in
Mac OS X only opportunities,
I think there's a real fertile
ground here for applications.
You consider by the time we ship 1.0,
the average system running OS X,
if you will, is going to be a pretty
high-performance machine.
G4s or high clock rate G3s,
good graphics systems.
You can really target a much
higher functionality set.
Even for us on OS X,
we do live window drag because
we're starting from scratch here.
On OS 9, where you need to go back to
the previous architectures,
maybe that's not always possible.
They could probably do it on OS 9 too.
Just an example of trade-offs where
if you know you're going to be
hitting a certain performance level,
why not take advantage of it?
There are some benefits for, say,
the smaller market of OS X.
You can turn that around to an
opportunity to really take advantage
of the hardware to its fullest.
The other thing is the technology
combination or the palette of
technologies we're offering on
OS X is really kind of a unique
combination in the industry.
I think if you look at BSD,
the plumbing and the standard
Unix facilities there,
up to the stuff we're doing with the
windowing system and the Quartz APIs,
OpenGL, Cocoa, QuickTime,
you kind of mix all that stuff
up together and you've got some
pretty interesting opportunities
to do some pretty innovative apps.
So if you're looking
for OS X opportunities,
I would say go for it.
And hopefully next year
at this conference,
we'll all be surprised by
the demos you guys give,
which would be great.
So I do have some roadmap slides here to
point you at some additional sessions.
Then I think we're going to have
time for some Q&A after that.
Today, there's one more session
this afternoon in Room C,
which is the font management session.
If you want to learn how
to manage fonts on OS X,
since they're between the font management
away from the resource manager,
you need to hear about that.
On Thursday, there are some sessions
on OpenGL in the morning.
There's a Beyond Games session
that Jeff Stahl is doing to show
some of the other ideas for how
you can use OpenGL in not just 3D,
in games.
There's an
OpenGL Advanced Optimization session,
which talks about some of the
extensions that we're working on and
some of the optimization techniques,
like compiled vertex
arrays and other things,
if you really want to make your
frames go as fast as possible.
There is certain code passed through
OpenGL that you need to be aware of
if you're really trying to get as
many triangles through as possible.
There's an OpenGL Feedback
Forum tomorrow as well,
so you can meet the team,
give them some feedback.
And tomorrow, of course,
is the Image Capture session also,
which will be across the street
in the Civic Center to learn
about the Image Capture framework
and see some demos of that.
And then, for the rest of the session,
we'll be back with some more information.
Friday,
we have a pretty full slate for you,
starting at 9:00, the ColorSync session,
the Mac OS X printing session.
There are two printing sessions,
introductory and advanced.
There's the session on the Quartz APIs,
which will be in Hall 2, in here,
at 2:00.
And then, finally,
the last event of the conference,
which you're all going to hang out for,
is the Graphics and
Printing Feedback session.
And so we'll all be there,
and you can meet the team and
give us additional feedback.
So with that, one more slide.
Who to contact on the DTS side
at Developer Relations as far as
our developer partnership folks.
John Signa,
who is the technology manager for Mac OS,
Core OS, and Graphics Services.
Sergio Mello,
who's recently joined the Apple team
as a 3D technology manager.
Their email addresses are there.
And there's a feedback address at
apple.com for graphics feedback as well.
So you can send stuff there.
Okay, I'd like to invite a few members
of the team who might be around,
and John back on stage to
bring up the house lights,
maybe do a few Q&A here.